Establish Automation/AI policy (#15984)
NixOS/nix: CONTRIBUTING.md

Both LLM‐based AI tools and hand‐written automation are covered.
Contributions include code and documentation in commits, commit messages, pull request summaries and reviews, issue and vulnerability reports, GitHub comments, Matrix messages, and Discourse posts.
The covered venues are the GitHub repositories for Nix and related projects under the jurisdiction of the Nix team, Matrix rooms that are focused on development of those projects, and Discourse topics about Nix development.

### Accountability

Everyone who submits a contribution to Nix is responsible for it, regardless of the use of automated tooling.
Before submission, they must establish a reasonable level of understanding of the contribution and expectation of its correctness.
A contributor submitting a contribution intended for inclusion in Nix is also responsible for ensuring that it is [appropriately licensed](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/blob/master/COPYING) and credited, and not encumbered by any incompatible copyright.

When output from automated tooling is used in contributions, a contributor must establish confidence in that output.

> This can be achieved by establishing confidence in the correctness of the tooling’s logic, manual review of the included output, or using further automation to verify the output (e.g. programmatically checking whether a refactor avoids causing rebuilds).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be achieved by establishing confidence in the correctness of the tooling’s logic, manual review of the included output, or using further automation to verify the output (e.g. regression tests that surface the issue before a bugfix commit).
```

Automation without any manual review must not be used as the sole arbiter of whether to merge a change.

### Transparency

All covered use of automated tooling for a contribution must be disclosed as part of that contribution.

In the case of LLM‐based AI tooling used for commits, this **must** be in the form of an `Assisted-by:` Git commit trailer, including at least the tool name and the primary model name and version used for the contribution.
A `Co-authored-by:` trailer does not satisfy this policy.

Any adequate form of disclosure is permitted for other kinds of tooling and contribution.
Pull request summaries and review comments must be disclosed separately to commits.

### Exemptions

The following situations are fully or partially exempt:

* Use of standard deterministic editor/IDE/formatter/text transformation tooling to produce changes that the author manually reviews and understands is exempt, including inline “auto‐completion” (even if LLM‐based) of short, rote snippets of text that do not contribute anything beyond boilerplate the author would have written anyway.

> * Use of standard community automation is exempt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Use of standard community automation is exempt (e.g. dependabot).
```

7. If you need additional feedback or help to getting pull request into shape, ask other contributors using [@mentions](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax#mentioning-people-and-teams).

## Automation/AI policy

Every contribution to Nix and related development venues, including code, documentation, and communication on GitHub and Matrix, must have a responsible person in the loop who is accountable for that contribution and reviews it before submission, and must transparently disclose any non‐trivial use of automation to produce it, including but not limited to LLM‐based AI tools.

> Human communication must remain human. Pull request / issue descriptions and comments, documentation, commit messages, and code comments must be human-authored.

Reviewer: Might be worth clarifying that typo/grammar checking is of course automatable (it's large Language models after all).

Author: Amended the exemptions section with a mention of this.

> Use of automation or LLM-based tools to resolve issues marked as a [good first issue](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/labels/good%20first%20issue) is not permitted.

Reviewer: Note that this might have a slight "gotcha". Typically good first issues are not critical to fix, but might later become more relevant/require maintainers to fix those in a timely manner.

> Use of automation or LLM-based tools to resolve issues marked as a [good first issue](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/labels/good%20first%20issue) is not permitted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PRs that seek to address that appear easier to fix, such as those marked with [good first issue](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/labels/good%20first%20issue), are held to the same standard as other issues.
Just because the problem seems "easy" and more likely to be successfully fixed by an unsupervised agent does not mean bending the rules is permissible.
Even the most trivial changes still must have a responsible person in the loop,
```

### Accountability

Everyone who submits a contribution to Nix is responsible for it, regardless of the use of automated tooling.
Before submission, they must establish a reasonable level of understanding of the contribution and expectation of its correctness.
A contributor submitting a contribution intended for inclusion in Nix is also responsible for ensuring that it is [appropriately licensed](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/blob/master/COPYING) and credited, and not encumbered by any incompatible copyright.

When output from automated tooling is used in contributions, a contributor must establish confidence in that output.
This can be achieved by establishing confidence in the correctness of the tooling’s logic, manual review of the included output, or using further automation to verify the output (e.g. regression tests that surface the issue before a bugfix commit).
As the inner workings of LLM‐based AI tools cannot be sufficiently understood at present, only the latter two options are available when those are used; vibe coding without review is not permitted.

> When automation is used to verify output, the verification tooling itself must be disclosed and reviewed in line with this policy.

Reviewer: This seems a bit too nixpkgs-centric, for a C++ codebase the presence of good enough tests (that are not vacuous) is good enough.

7. If you need additional feedback or help to getting pull request into shape, ask other contributors using [@mentions](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax#mentioning-people-and-teams).

## Automation/AI policy

> Every contribution to Nix and related development venues, including code, documentation, and communication on GitHub and Matrix, must have a responsible person in the loop who is accountable for that contribution and reviews it before submission, and must transparently disclose any non‐trivial use of automation to produce it, including but not limited to LLM‐based AI tools.

Reviewer 3: What counts as trivial / non-trivial uses of automation? I'm not just being pedantic I would guess different people would define this very differently.

Maybe we don't have to be precise and what exactly we mean by this can be worked out on a case-by-case basis 🤷‍♀️

Author: I think it's fleshed out a bit later on, where it says that autocomplete is exempted.

> Human communication must remain human. Pull request / issue descriptions and comments, documentation, commit messages, and code comments must be human-authored.

Reviewer 4: We should probably exempt comments from AI code review tools like coderabbit here. Of course, such comments must be clearly marked as coming from an AI.

The following sections give more detail.

### Scope

Any use of automated tools to generate non‐trivial amounts of output as part of a contribution, in whole or in part, verbatim or edited, is covered by this policy, except as listed in the Exemptions section.

> Both LLM‐based AI tools and hand‐written automation are covered.

Reviewer 3: Given that IDE features / text translation tools / etc are exempt, what hand-written automation tools are we worried about? It might be worth putting in a few examples, because it's not clear to me what we're referring to here.

Reviewer 5: This comes from nixpkgs, where we use scripts for large scale refactorings. This have broke things in the past.

Reviewer: > what hand-written automation tools are we worried about

Realistically, some clang-based tooling for automating certain refactors. Like some stuff I had written before for `std::format`, which never got used actually https://github.com/xokdvium/refactor-tractor/blob/main/tools/nix-hint-fmt-migrate/src/NixHintFmtMigrate.cpp. Though this is so few and far between that it might not be worthwhile to focus on in the scope of this policy.

Just because the problem seems "easy" and more likely to be successfully fixed by an unsupervised agent does not mean bending the rules is permissible.
Even the most trivial changes still must have a responsible person in the loop.

### Accountability

Everyone who submits a contribution to Nix is responsible for it, regardless of the use of automated tooling.
Before submission, they must establish a reasonable level of understanding of the contribution and expectation of its correctness.
A contributor submitting a contribution intended for inclusion in Nix is also responsible for ensuring that it is [appropriately licensed](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/blob/master/COPYING) and credited, and not encumbered by any incompatible copyright.

When output from automated tooling is used in contributions, a contributor must establish confidence in that output.
This can be achieved by establishing confidence in the correctness of the tooling’s logic, manual review of the included output, or using further automation to verify the output (e.g. regression tests that surface the issue before a bugfix commit).

> As the inner workings of LLM‐based AI tools cannot be sufficiently understood at present, only the latter two options are available when those are used; vibe coding without review is not permitted.

Reviewer 3: Is "further automation to verify the output" on its own sufficient? It seems from things said here and elsewhere that the answer is "no", and that would be my vote too, but from these sentences it seems like it might be sufficient.

Author: Maybe we should just take out line 117 and line 118, I don't think it really adds anything, I think line 116 on its own is sufficient.

Reviewer 6: I think one interpretation is that there might exist deterministic automation plus a strong argument that could suffice for verification in some particular case, but the burden of the proof is on the submitter. One LLM commenting on the other LLM's output is not enough though.

Author: I dropped those lines, I think we should just assess on a case-by-case basis depending on the change. Using automation to verify the correctness is more of a nixpkgs thing, it doesn't apply as much to Nix.

This policy applies equally to any further discussion of a contribution.
Comments and reviews must separately satisfy the same requirements of understanding, review, and disclosure.
Contributors are expected to be able to answer questions about their contribution and respond to feedback appropriately, **without simply forwarding messages back and forth to automated tools**.

It is not permitted to submit automated contributions without any manual review or intervention, outside of standard community automation.
Automation without any manual review must not be used as the sole arbiter of whether to merge a change.

### Transparency

All covered use of automated tooling for a contribution must be disclosed as part of that contribution.

> In the case of LLM‐based AI tooling used for commits, this **must** be in the form of an `Assisted-by:` Git commit trailer, including at least the tool name and the primary model name and version used for the contribution.

Reviewer 5: Since we also have a few Anthropic contributors in our community, they might be not always allowed to disclose what exact model they are using. But I suppose they could also just provide the name of the latest released model?

Reviewer 6: Good question whether using the released version for the final implementation to be submitted is a strong constraint or not really anymore (in the sense of using an undisclosed model to find relevant places and check that the change is doable, then ask the released model to do the final patch by doing this and that change in that place — this would only ask for the released model version under the policy, as far as I can tell).

Author: I think for that it's simply okay to specify that they're using an unreleased model, I can clarify this.

Reviewer 5: So Anthropic policy is to put in something like this: `Assisted-by: Claude:unspecified` and requires all LLM-generated commits to be pushed manually after reviewing.

A `Co-authored-by:` trailer does not satisfy this policy.

Any adequate form of disclosure is permitted for other kinds of tooling and contribution.

> Pull request summaries and review comments must be disclosed separately to commits.

Reviewer 3: We've already said these should *not* be produced by automated tooling, and must be human written. Why are we now saying that being written by AI must be disclosed?

Author: Oh, good catch, I'll fix that. This bit was just pulled from the nixpkgs policy and I overlooked it when adding the human communication part.

### Exemptions

The following situations are fully or partially exempt:

* Use of standard deterministic editor/IDE/formatter/text transformation tooling to produce changes that the author manually reviews and understands is exempt, including inline "auto‐completion" (even if LLM‐based) of short, rote snippets of text that do not contribute anything beyond boilerplate the author would have written anyway, and spelling and grammar checkers.

* Use of standard community automation is exempt (e.g. dependabot).

* Use of AI tools for research, testing, debugging, or review is out of scope, if no substantial amount of their output is included in the resulting contribution.
  However, if these tools had a significant technical influence on your contribution, you are still responsible for it per the Accountability section, and are expected to disclose this where relevant.

* Use of machine translation is exempt from the requirement to understand the translated output.

>   However, the requirements of appropriate confidence in the original text, responsibility, and disclosure still apply, and you are encouraged to additionally include the original untranslated contribution.

Reviewer 4: Should clarify that this refers to stuff like translating PR comments, not internationalizing Nix (e.g. we don't want somebody who doesn't know Chinese contribute AI-written Chinese I18N translations).

>   However, the requirements of appropriate confidence in the original text, responsibility, and disclosure still apply, and you are encouraged to additionally include the original untranslated contribution.

Reviewer 3: Why encouraged? It seems to me like keeping the original text should be required.
